                     PLEASE NOTE:


YOU HAVE ACCESSED THIS TRANSLATION ON A SITE THAT WILL
SOON BE RETIRED, AND THE WEB ADDRESS YOU HAVE USED TO
       RETRIEVE THIS FILE WILL NO LONGER WORK.


ACCESS TO THIS ITEM WILL CONTINUE AT A NEW WEB ADDRESS:



          chinatxt.sitehost.iu.edu/Resources

         MY APOLOGIES FOR THE INCONVENIENCE.


                                    - Bob Eno (1 September 2019)
                                 1




Dao de jing

   道德經




         Translated by Robert Eno
                              2010
                        Version 1.1
                                                                                                            2




                                          © 2010, 2016 Robert Eno

                            This online translation is made freely available for use in
                             not-for-profit educational settings and for personal use.

                         For other purposes, apart from fair use, copyright is not waived.




Note for readers:

This translation was originally prepared for use by students in a general course on early Chinese
thought. It should not be regarded as a scholarly translation, which, in the case of the Dao de jing,
would involve a great deal of analysis concerning the variant versions of the text now available, both
traditionally received versions and the archeologically recovered version mentioned in the
Introduction. The list of projects I prepared for my retirement includes replacing this classroom
version of the text with a truly scholarly online edition; however, I have so far busied myself since
retirement with other texts.

This translation does not follow a strong or innovative theory of the philosophy behind the Dao de
jing: I am, in fact, skeptical that a consistent philosophy lay behind the gradual generation of the text
we have today. My initial intention in preparing this translation was simply to provide my own
students with a version that conveyed the way I thought the text was probably best understood. Of
course, I was also happy to make a reasonably responsible rendering of the text available for my
students at no cost. I later posted the text online with this latter goal in mind for teachers who
wished to select portions of the text for classroom discussion without requiring students to make
additional costly purchases or dealing with issues of copyright in assembling extracts.

There are many thoughtful English translations of the text in commercially published form, and the
best of these reflect critical analysis derived from scholarly devotion to the text beyond my own. This
translation is not intended to replace them, and anyone interested in the serious study of Daoism
should look to published translations more scholarly than this one.

                                                                                                       RE
                                                                                             December 2016
                                                                                     1




                                        Introduction

If you walk into Borders Books or Barnes & Noble and look on the shelf devoted to
“Eastern Thought,” you may find one or two translations of the Analects of
Confucius. The books will probably be plain and low priced, perhaps reprints of long
out-of-print editions that are profitable to republish because royalties do not have to
be paid to the long-dead translators.
       Nearby you will find editions of Laozi’s Daoist classic, the Dao de jing,
stretching in an impressive line. Cheap reprints will sit between handsome new
hardback publications, some quite pricy, and the selection will also include glossy
oversize editions illustrated with elegant calligraphic ink designs or sinuous color
paintings. Some of the translators will have been paid six figure sums for their (often
incompetent) renderings of Laozi’s brief text (perhaps a quarter the size of the
Analects). Mini-editions may be included too, for those who feel they should carry the
words of the sage in their pocket at all times, in case wisdom should be suddenly
required when away from home.
       Everyone familiar with the field of Chinese thought knows that Daoism sells
in America and Confucianism doesn’t. And it’s no wonder. Daoist books are
beautifully written, poetic, imaginative, and often playful. And as far as serious
thinking goes, Daoist texts sound deeply profound, while Confucians have a tendency
to seem shallow and pedantic. One of the great attractions of Daoist texts is actually
that the sense of wisdom they convey is so deep that it frequently seems impossible
to understand what they mean. But when we hear Laozi utter majestic words such as,
“Reaching the ultimate of emptiness, deeply guarding stillness, the things of the world
arise together; thereby do I watch their return,” it seems almost sacrilegious to ask
precisely what he’s talking about.



                                             1
                                                                                     2


Major Daoist works
When we speak of Daoism in the Classical period, we generally mean by the term the
ideas of two rather mysterious texts that date from about the fourth century B.C.
These are the Dao de jing (道德經, The Classic of the Dao and of Virtue) by Laozi 老
子 and the works of the quirky recluse Zhuangzi 莊子, which appear in a book that
takes his name as its title. There are a number of other texts that share many ideas
with these two books, but we are not sure whether we should actually refer to them
as Daoist. Part of the reason we are unsure just which texts to classify as Daoist is
that the term “Daoism” itself is much vaguer than is the term Confucianism.
       While the Confucians were an identifiable school during the Warring States
period (450-221), with teachers and students who shared an identity as disciples of
the great Master, Confucius, there was, during the same period, no group of people
who called themselves “Daoists” or were labeled by that term. The books we call
Daoist are instead independent works, negative reactions against Confucianism that
share many features, but whose authors were not necessarily aware of one another or
conscious of contributing towards the formation of a school of thought. We do not
know, for example, whether the authors of the Dao de jing and Zhuangzi were teachers
with students or merely solitary writers whose words were read and passed down by
friends and admirers chiefly after their deaths. Only after the Classical period was
long over did scholars group these texts into a single school and coin a name for it,
calling it the “School of Dao” because of the unique role that the authors of these
texts assigned to the term Dao. For these writers, the Dao was not just a teaching that
they promoted, in competition with the Daos that other teachers offered. For Daoists,
the term “Dao” referred to a fundamental order of the universe that governed all
experience and that was the key to wisdom and human fulfillment.


The origins of Daoism
Daoism appears to have begun as an escapist movement during the early Warring
States period, and in some ways it makes sense to see it as an outgrowth of
Confucianism and its doctrine of “timeliness.” That doctrine originated with
Confucius’s motto: “When the Way prevails in the world, appear; when it does not,
                                                                                             3


hide!” Even in the Confucian Analects, we see signs of a Confucian trend towards
absolute withdrawal. The character and comportment of Confucius’s best disciple,
Yan Hui, who lived in obscurity in an impoverished lane yet “did not alter his joy,”
suggest this early tendency towards eremitism (the “hermit” lifestyle). In Book 18 of
the Analects, Confucius himself seems half drawn to this path of absolute social
withdrawal.

       Chang Ju and Jie Ni were ploughing the fields in harness together. Confucius passed
       by and sent his disciple Zilu over to ask directions. Chang Ju said, “Who is that
       holding the carriage reins?”
                Zilu said, “That is Kong Qiu.”
                “Kong Qiu of Lu?”
                “Yes.”
                “Why, then, he knows where he can go!”
                Zilu then asked Jie Ni. Jie Ni said, “And who are you?”
                “I am Zhong You.”
                “Are you a disciple of Kong Qiu of Lu?”
                “I am.”
                “The world is inundated now. Who can change it? Would you not be better
       off joining those who have fled from the world altogether, instead of following
       someone who flees from this man to that one?” Then the two of them went on with
       their ploughing.
                Zilu returned to report to Confucius. The Master’s brow furrowed. “I can-
       not flock together with the birds and beasts!” he cried. “If I am not a fellow traveler
       with men such as these, then with whom? If only the Dao prevailed in the world I
       would not have to try to change it!” (18.6)

       Righteous hermits were much admired in Classical China, and men who
withdrew from society to live in poverty “in the cliffs and caves” paradoxically often
enjoyed a type of celebrity status. The legend of Bo Yi, a hermit who descended from
his mountain retreat because of the righteousness of King Wen of Zhou, led to the
popular idea of hermits as virtue-barometers -- they rose to the mountains when
power was in the hands of immoral rulers, but would come back down to society
when a sage king finally appeared. Patrician lords very much valued visits from men
with reputations as righteous hermits, and this probably created the opportunity for
men to appear at court seeking patronage on the basis of their eremitic purity.
       Possibly during the fourth century, this eremitic tradition seems to have
generated a complex of new ideas that included appreciation for the majestic rhythms
of the natural world apart from human society, a celebration of the isolated individual
                                                                                                        4


whose lonely stance signaled a unique power of enlightenment, and a growing interest
in the potential social and political leverage that such renunciation of social and
political entanglements seemed to promise. The product that emerged from these
trends is the Dao de jing of Laozi, perhaps the most famous of all Chinese books.


Laozi, the guy
Despite the fact that after his death he became one of the world’s two or three best-
selling authors, Laozi never actually died. In traditional China, many people believed
that this was so because Laozi had possessed the secret of immortality and had
evaded death by transforming his body into a non-perishable form, after which, being
able to fly, he had moved his home to heavenly realms. Modern scholars believe that
the reason Laozi never died is because he never lived. There was never any such
person as Laozi.
        “Laozi” means “the Old Master.” The Lao in his name is not a Chinese
surname and Laozi was surely not initially meant to be understood as an identifiable
author’s name. The Dao de jing is an anonymous text. Judging by its contents, it was
compiled by several very different authors and editors over a period of perhaps a
century, reaching its present form perhaps during the third century BCE. ∗
        However, the authorial voice in the Dao de jing is so strong that readers of the
text were from the beginning fascinated with the personality of the apparent author,
and among the deep thinkers who claimed to understand the book, there were some
who also claimed to know all about the man who wrote it. Pieces of biography began
to stick to the name Laozi, and, to make sure that readers understood that Laozi was
a more authoritative person than Confucius, his biography came to include tales of
his personal relationship to Confucius. Laozi, it seemed, had actually lived before
Confucius and had actually been Confucius’s teacher. Confucius had journeyed far to
study with the great Daoist master, whose sageliness he recognized. Unfortunately,
Confucius had not been wise enough to grasp Laozi’s profound message and Laozi,

∗
 Manuscript versions of portions of the text dating from the beginning of that century or slightly earlier
were archaeologically recovered in 1993; they show a text still significantly distant from the one we have
today. Of several bamboo proto-Dao de jing texts, none constitutes more than about a third of the present
text, though taken together they comprise a much larger portion, and the differences of chapter
arrangement and of texts of individual chapters are very significant.
                                                                                        5


for his part, had found Confucius to be a well-meaning but unintelligent pupil. Later
in Chinese history, Daoist initiates discovered that before becoming an immortal,
Laozi had traveled from China to India, where he went by the name “Buddha” – but
that’s a story for another course.


The Dao de jing
Much of the attraction of the Dao de jing is the product of its very powerful rhetoric.
It is written in a uniquely resonant style, and fortunately it is possible to capture some
of this resonance even in English translation. The arcane or mysterious style of the
Dao de jing is not an accident. It seems very clear that the composers of the text
wanted the book to be mysterious. Part of the message that the Dao de jing is meant to
convey is precisely that there is a type of wisdom that is so subtle and esoteric that it
is difficult for ordinary minds to comprehend.
       The opening phrase of the text sets its tone: “A Dao that may be spoken is
not the enduring Dao.” What does this say about the book we are about to read --
among other things, that it will not tell us what the Dao is, since this is beyond the
power of words to convey. In the original Chinese, the first line is famously difficult
to understand. Since the term that the text chooses to use for the word “spoken” is
Dao (which includes “to speak” among its meanings), the first six words of the book
include the word Dao three times (more literally it reads: “A Dao you can Dao isn’t the
enduring Dao.”) Throughout the Dao de jing the very compressed language challenges
readers to “break the code” of the text instead of conveying ideas clearly. Every
passage seems to deliver this basic message: Real wisdom is so utterly different from
what usually passes for wisdom that only a dramatic leap away from our ordinary
perspective can allow us to begin to grasp it.


Basic ideas of the Dao de jing
The Dao de jing is often a vague and inconsistent book and it is sometimes tempting to
wonder whether its authors really had any special insight to offer, or whether they
just wanted to sound impressive. But the book does in fact articulate ideas of great
originality and interest, ideas that have had enormous influence on Asian culture. The
following eight points are among those most central to the text:
                                                                              6



1. The nature of the Dao. There exists in some sense an overarching order to the
cosmos, beyond the power of words to describe. This order, which the book
refers to as the Dao, has governed the cosmos from its beginning and
continues to pervade every aspect of existence. It may be understood as a
process that may be glimpsed in all aspects of the world that have not been
distorted by the control of human beings, for there is something about us that
runs counter to the Dao, and that makes human life a problem. Human beings
possess some flaw that has made our species alone insensitive to the Dao.
Ordinary people are ignorant of this fact; the Dao de jing tries to awaken them
to it.

2. Changing perspective. To understand the nature of human ignorance, it is
necessary to undergo a fundamental change in our perspective. To do this, we
need to disentangle ourselves from beliefs we live by that have been
established through words and experience life directly. Our intellectual lives,
permeated with ideas expressed in language, are the chief obstacle to wisdom.

3. Value relativity. If we were able to escape the beliefs we live by and see
human life from the perspective of the Dao, we would understand that we
normally view the world through a lens of value judgments -- we see things as
good or bad, desirable or detestable. The cosmos itself possesses none of
these characteristics of value. All values are only human conventions that we
project onto the world. Good and bad are non-natural distinctions that we need
to discard if we are to see the world as it really is.

4. Nature and spontaneity. The marks of human experience are value judgments
and planned action. The marks of the Dao are freedom from judgment and
spontaneity. The processes of the Dao may be most clearly seen in the action
of the non-human world, Nature. Trees and flowers, birds and beasts do not
follow a code of ethics and act spontaneously from instinctual responses. The
order of Nature is an image of the action of the Dao. To grasp the perspective
of the Dao, human beings need to discard judgment and act on their
spontaneous impulses. The Dao de jing celebrates spontaneous action with two
complementary terms, “self-so” and “non-striving” (ziran and wuwei, see
Glossary). The inhabitants of the Natural world are “self-so,” they simply are
as they are, without any intention to be so. Human beings live by purposive
action, planning and striving. To become Dao-like, we need to return to an
animal-like responsiveness to simple instincts, and act without plans or effort.
This “wuwei” style of behavior is the most central imperative Daoist texts
recommend for us.
                                                                                7


5. The distortion of mind and language. The source of human deviation from the
Dao lies in the way that our species has come to use its unique property, the
mind (xin, see Glossary). Rather than allow our minds to serve as a responsive
mirror of the world, we have used it to develop language and let our thoughts
and perceptions be governed by the categories that language creates, such as
value judgments. The mind’s use of language has created false wisdom, and
our commitment to this false wisdom has come to blind us to the world as it
really is, and to the Dao that orders it. The person who “practices” wuwei
quiets the mind and leaves language behind.

6. Selflessness. The greatest barriers to discarding language and our value
judgments are our urges for things we believe are desirable and our impulse to
obtain these things for ourselves. The selfishness of our ordinary lives makes
us devote all our energies to a chase for possessions and pleasures, which
leaves us no space for the detached tranquility needed to join the harmonious
rhythm of Nature and the Dao. The practice of wu-wei entails a release from
pursuits of self-interest and a self-centered standpoint. The line between
ourselves as individuals in accord with the Dao and the Dao-governed world
at large becomes much less significant for us.

6. Power and sagehood. The person who embraces the spontaneity of wu-wei and
leaves self-interest behind emerges into a new dimension of natural experience,
and becomes immune to all the frightening dangers that beset us in ordinary
experience. Once weakness, poverty, injury, and early death are no longer
concepts we employ in our lives, we discover that such dangers do not really
exist. Once we are part of the spontaneous order of Nature, it presents no
threat to us and we gain tremendous leverage over it. We have the power (de,
see Glossary) of the Dao. This active power is wisdom, and the person who
possesses it is a sage.

7. The human influence of the sage. The selfless power of the sage endows him or
her with a social prestige that cannot be matched by ordinary people. So
magnificent is the presence of the sage that those who come into contact with
such a person cannot help but be deeply influenced. As in the case of
Confucianism, de (character, virtue, power) has power over other people, who
will spontaneously place themselves under the protection of and seek to
emulate the sage.

8. The political outcome. As the Daoist sage comes effortlessly to subdue the
world, he will necessarily be treated as its king. The rule of such a king will be
to discard all human institutions and social patterns that are the product of
human intellectual effort and value judgments. The people will be returned to
a simple and primitive state close to animal society, and this social
environment will itself nurture in the population a stance of wuwei. Ultimately,
                                                                                        8


       the world will return to the bliss of ignorance and fulfillment in a stable life of
       food gathering, food consumption, and procreation, all governed by the
       seasonal rhythms of Nature and the Dao.

       It is not hard to see how a philosophy along these lines could have emerged
from a group of hermits who had withdrawn out of social disillusionment. The anti-
Confucian elements of the Dao de jing should also be easy to identify. The most
important metaphors that the text uses to symbolize the Dao and the sage are an
uncarved block of wood and an undyed piece of cloth, which contrast clearly with the
Confucian celebration of the elaborate ritual patterns institutionalized by legendary
sage kings.
       What is more surprising, however, is that the Dao de jing proved to be a very
popular text among the ruling class of late Classical China. This was the result of the
fact that it seemed to provide a paradoxical path to social and political wealth and
power through the act of renouncing interest in wealth and power. “The sage places
his person last and it comes first,” the Dao de jing tells us. Daoists who arrived at
feudal courts in the Classical period found that they could attract the interest of
ambitious men by linking their Dao of selflessness to an outcome in accord with the
most selfish of ambitions.
       One important difference between the ideas of the Dao de jing and those of the
Confucian writers is that while the Confucians made very clear the practical path that
people needed to follow to achieve wisdom – the ritual syllabus of the Confucian
Finishing School – the Dao de jing is extremely vague when it comes to practical
advice. While wuwei may be simple in the abstract (just behave more or less like your
dog does), in practice there are problems (hey, nobody filled my dish!). If you spend
one hour following the imperative to eliminate value judgments and the desires
associated with them, you will discover that without a teacher or model rules to
follow, it is difficult to follow the Dao of the Dao de jing.


Structure of the text
The Dao de jing consists of eighty-one brief chapters. Portions or all of many are in
verse-like form, though others are unrhymed and much simpler rhetorically. The
integrity of the chapters seems to have evolved at an early date. In the earliest extant
                                                                                      9


manuscripts, datable to the last part of the fourth century BCE, we see many of the
chapters already fully formed, although ordered differently. In some cases, parts of
the chapters seem not to have yet been incorporated; we don’t know whether that is
because they were “inserted” later, or whether there were simply multiple versions of
the text circulating at the time and a different version is the ancestor of the received
text that has been preserved until today.
       The text was traditionally divided into two halves. The first 37 chapters
constituted the upper portion, and was traditionally known as the “Classic of the
Dao,” in part because the initial word of the text is the word dao 道, and in part
because these chapters seem, on the whole, more focused on that key concept. The
rest of the chapters were known as the “Classic of De,” in part because the initial
phrase of chapter 38 is, “highest virtue (de 德),” using the second key term of the
text’s title, and in part because there is, on the whole, a somewhat greater emphasis
on this notion of a power of character in this portion of the text. A second century
BCE silk version of the text that was archaeologically recovered in 1973 places the
“Classic of De” portion first, which tells us both that the division of the text into
these two portions is very old, and that different versions of the text varied in the
choice of which to place first.
       Most Dao de jing chapters appear to be a collection of brief sayings, rather than
the product of a single literary impulse. Many component portions of chapters appear
multiple times in the text. In his excellent 1963 translation of the text, the late D.C.
Lau began a practice of labeling these separate sub-sections according to his
judgment of where divisions within chapters occurred. Others have since followed
this practice, and the version below does the same.
                                                                                 10


                               Dao de jing
                                       1.

a>   A dao that may be spoken is not the enduring Dao. A name that may be
           named is not an enduring name.
     No names – this is the beginning of heaven and earth. Having names – this is
           the mother of the things of the world.

b>   Make freedom from desire your constant norm; thereby you will see what is
           subtle. Make having desires your constant norm; thereby you will see
           what is manifest.
     These two arise from the same source but have different names. Together
           they may be termed ‘the mysterious’.
     Mystery and more mystery: the gate of all that is subtle.



                                       2.

a>   All in the world deem the beautiful to be beautiful; it is ugly. All deem the
            good to be good; it is bad.

b>          What is and what is not give birth to one another,
            What is difficult and what is easy complete one another,
            Long and short complement one another,
            High and low incline towards one another,
            Note and noise harmonize with one another,
            Before and after follow one another.

c>   Therefore the sage dwells in the midst of non-action (wuwei) and practices
           the wordless teaching.

d>   Herein arise the things of the world, it does not turn from them; what it gives
           birth to it does not possess; what it does it does not retain. The
           achievements complete, it makes no claim to them. Because it makes
           no claim to them, they never leave it.
                                                                               11



                                         3.

a>   Do not honor the worthy. This will keep the people from contention. Do not
           prize rare things. This will keep the people from becoming thieves. Do
           not display the desirable. The hearts of the people will not be
           turbulent.

b>   Hence the governance of the sage:
           Empty their minds and fill their bellies,
           Weaken their wills and strengthen their bones.
     Always render the people free of knowledge and desire. Ensure that the
           clever do not dare to act.

c>   Engage in non-action (wuwei) and nothing will go unruled.


                                         4.

a>   The Dao is empty yet you may keep drawing from it as though it could never
           fill your need.

b>   It is an abyss, like the ancestor of the world of things.

c>          Blunt the point,
            Undo the tangle,
            Soften the glare,
            Join the dust.

d>   Dim, it seems almost to exist. I know not whose child it may be. It seems the
            forerunner of the Lord.



                                         5.

a>   Heaven and earth are not ren: they treat the things of the world as straw
           dogs. The sage is not ren: he treats the people as straw dogs.

b>   All between heaven and earth is like a great bellows--
            Empty, yet it does not collapse,
            The more it is moved the more it issues forth.

c>   Many words are soon exhausted;
          Better to preserve the central.
                                                                                     12


                                         6.

     The spirit of the ravine is undying; it is called the dark vagina. The gateway
            of the dark vagina is called the root of the world.
     Stretching further and further, as though always there; use it, effortless.


                                         7.

     Heaven endures; earth long abides. Heaven endures and earth long abides
           because they do not give birth to themselves. Hence they are long lived.
     Hence the sage places his person last, and it comes first; he treats it as
           something external to him and it endures.
     Does he not employ selflessness? Hence he attains his self-regarding ends.


                                         8.

     Highest good is like water: water benefits the things of the world and does
            not contend.
     Dwell in places that the masses of men despise.


                                         9.

a>   It is better to stop pouring than to grasp it until it is full; the blade forged to
             full sharpness will not last long.
     Halls filled with gold and jade can never be secured; pride in wealth and
             rank brings disaster upon itself.

b>   The work being done, step out of view – that is the dao of Tian.



                                         10.

a>   As you carry your bodily soul embracing oneness, can you never depart from
           it?
     As you concentrate your qi and extend your suppleness, can you be as a new
           born babe?
     As you polish the dust from your mysterious mirror, can you render it free of
           all blemishes?
     As you cherish the people and order the state, can you do so without
           awareness?
     As heaven’s gate swings open and shut can you keep to the female?
                                                                                   13


     As your brilliant awareness penetrates everywhere can you refrain from
           employing it in action?

b>   You give birth to it, you nurture it – yet in giving birth you do not possess it,
           in doing it you do not retain it, in leading it you employ no authority:
           this is called mysterious power (de).


                                        11.

     Thirty spokes share a single hub; grasp the nothingness at its center to get
            the use of the wheel.
     Clay is fashioned to make a vessel; grasp the nothingness at the center to get
            the use of the vessel.
     Bore windows and doors to create a room; grasp the nothingness of the
            interior to get the use of the room.
     That which is constitutes what is valuable, but that which is not constitutes
            what is of use.


                                        12.

           The five colors blind men’s eyes,
           The five tones deafen men’s ears,
           The five flavors numb men’s mouths,
           Racing at a gallop in pursuit of the hunt maddens men’s minds.
           Rare objects obstruct men’s conduct.
     Therefore the sage is for the belly and not for the eye. Therefore he discards
           the one and selects the other.


                                        13.

     Great favor and disgrace startle alike. Prize great troubles as you do your
           body.
     What do I mean by “great favor and disgrace startle alike?” When an
           inferior receives a superior’s favor, he is startled when he gets it, and
           startled when he loses it. That is the meaning of “great favor and
           disgrace startle alike.”
     What do I mean by “prize great troubles as you do your body?” The only
           reason I have great troubles is because I have a body; if I had no body,
           what trouble would I have?
     Therefore, he who prizes his body as if it were the world can be given charge
           of the world. He who loves his body as if it were the world can be
           entrusted with the world.
                                                                                  14



                                        14.

a>   What you look at but cannot see is called ‘transparent’; what you listen to
          but cannot hear is called ‘rarified’; what you grab at but cannot grasp
          is called ‘minute’. These three cannot be probed through, thus they
          are conflated to one.

b>   Its top is unshining, its bottom not darkened – endless, it cannot be named.
            Returned to a state without things, it is called the form of no form, the
            image of no things; it is called the indistinct.

c>   Encountering it you do not see its head; pursuing it you do not see its back.
          Grasp the dao of the past to steer what there is today.

d>   To be able to know the beginning of the past is called the guideline of the Dao.


                                        15.

a>   In the past, those who were good at being gentlemen were subtle, marvelous,
            mysterious, penetrating – so deep they could not be fathomed. Just
            because they cannot be fathomed, I strain to describe their
            appearance:
                    Hesitant, as though crossing a winter stream;
                    Timid, as though fearing all nearby;
                    Reverent, like a guest;
                    Rent, like river ice soon to melt;
                    Solid, like an uncarved block;
                    Vacant, like a valley;
                    Turbid, like muddied water.

b>          Who can be turbid, yet settling slowly clear?
            Who can be at rest, yet moving slowly come to life?

c>   One who protects this dao does not wish to become full. It is precisely
          because he is not full that he can be tattered yet new made.


                                        16.

     Reaching the ultimate of emptiness, deeply guarding stillness, the things of
           the world arise together; thereby do I watch their return.
     The things of the world burst out everywhere, and each returns to its own
           root.
                                                                                 15


     Returning to the root is called stillness; this is called returning to destiny;
           returning to destiny is called constant; knowing the constant is called
           enlightenment.
     Not knowing the constant one acts blindly and ill-omened.
     Knowing the constant one can accommodate; accommodation leads to
           impartiality; impartiality leads to kingliness; kingliness leads to Tian;
           Tian leads to the Dao.
     With the Dao one may endure, and to the end of life one will not be in danger.


                                       17.

     The best: those below are aware that he is there. Next best: they love and
            praise him. Next best, they fear him. Next best: they insult him.
     Insufficient faith above, unfaithfulness below.
     Far off, he speaks but rarely. When the work is accomplished and the task is
            complete, the people all say, “We did it of ourselves.”


                                       18.

     When the Great Dao was discarded, only then came ren and right. When
          wisdom and insight emerged, only then came the Great Artifice.
          When the six kinship classes fell out of harmony, only then came
          filiality and parental kindness. When the state is darkened with chaos,
          only then do the loyal ministers appear.


                                       19.

     Cut off sagehood! Cast out wisdom! The people will benefit a hundredfold.
     Cut off ren! Cast out right! The people will return to filiality and parental
             kindness.
     Cut off cleverness! Cast out profit! Brigands and thieves will nowhere be
             found.
     As patterns, these three are insufficient and only make the people seek to add
             to them.
     Exhibit the plainness of undyed cloth; embrace the uncarved block.
     Be little self-regarding and make your desires few.


                                       20.

a>   To assent and to object – how different are they? Beauty and ugliness – what
     is the distinction between them?

b>   What others fear, one must fear too – how baseless! Far off the mark!
                                                                                  16



c>   How joyous the mass of people are, as if banqueting on the sacrificed ox, as if
     mounting a tower in spring –
           I alone am still, without visible sign, like a new born baby yet to smile,
                  all listless, like one with no home.
           The mass of people have more than enough –
           I alone appear bereft; I, with the mind of a dolt, so slow.
           Ordinary men are brilliant –
           I am dim.
           Ordinary men are perceptive –
           I am closed.
           Sudden, like the sea, like a tempest, as though endless, the mass of
                  people all have their means –
           I alone am obstinate, uncouth.
           I alone wish to be different from others, and value feeding from the
                  mother.


                                       21.

a>   The bearing of abundant virtue is to follow the Dao alone.

b>   As a thing the Dao is shadowed, obscure.
                   Shadowed, obscured,
                   A thing lies within;
                   Obscured, shadowed,
                   An image lies within.
                   Dark, dim,
                   An essence lies within.
                   So sound is the essence,
                   Full concord lies within.

c>   From the past to the present, its name has never left it, and hence it has
           pleased the multitude of elders. How do I know this of the multitude
           of elders? By means of this.


                                       22.

     “A fragment, thus whole”: bent, thus straight; hollow, thus full; worn, thus
            new.
     Few, thus gaining; many, thus confused – therefore the sage embraces One
            and is a standard for the world.
     Not revealing himself, thus bright; not asserting himself, thus shining; not
            praising himself, thus meritorious; not boasting of himself, thus
            enduring.
                                                                             17


He does not contend, thus none can content with him.
      The old saying, “A fragment, thus whole,” how could it be empty
      words? Truly, it will return whole in the end.


                                  23.

To be sparse in speech is to be spontaneous.
Thus wind squalls do not outlast the morning and teeming rain does not
       outlast the day. Who causes these? Heaven and earth. Even heaven
       and earth cannot long persist thus, how much less can man.
Those who follow the Dao are alike in Dao with others who follow the Dao,
       are alike in virtue with others who have virtue, are alike is loss with
       others who have loss.
Alike in Dao with others who follow the Dao - he delights indeed in grasping
       the Dao; alike in virtue with others who have virtue - he delights
       indeed in having virtue; alike in loss others who have loss - he delights
       indeed in having loss.
Where faithfulness is insufficient there is unfaithfulness.


                                  24.

One on tiptoe cannot stand; one whose legs are spread cannot walk.
One who shows himself cannot be bright; one who asserts himself cannot
      shone; one who praises himself can be meritorious; one who boasts of
      himself cannot endure.
For the Dao, these are called “excess store and superfluous acts.” Things
      detest them; therefore, the man of the Dao does not abide in them.


                                  25.

There is a thing formed from confusion and born before heaven and earth.
        Silent, solitary, alone and unchanging. It revolves everywhere and is
        never in danger. It can be the mother of all under heaven. I do not
        know its name, but I style it ‘the Dao’.
If forced to give it a name, I call if ‘the Great’. The Great I call ‘Receding’.
        Receding I call ‘Distant’. Distant I call ‘Reversing’.
Thus the Dao is great, heaven is great, earth is great, and the king is great as
        well.
                Within the realm there are four great ones, and the king sits as
                       one among them.
Men emulate earth; earth emulates heaven (tian); heaven emulates the Dao;
        the Dao emulates spontaneity.
                                                                                18



                                          26.

a>   Heaviness is the root of lightness; tranquility is the lord of haste.

b>   Therefore, to the day’s end the traveling sage never leaves his laden carts.
           Though beside lavish towers, he stays by them all aloof.

c>   How could the ruler of a thousand chariot state take his own body as of lesser
           weight than the world?

d>   To be light is to lose the root; to be hasty is to lose one’s lord.


                                          27.

a>   Good traveling leaves no wheel ruts; good talking makes no slips; good
           counting uses no counters.
     Good shutting uses no bolts, yet cannot be opened; good tying uses no cords,
           yet cannot be undone.

b>   Therefore, the sage is always good at rescuing people, thus he never
             abandons any person; he is always good at rescuing affairs, thus he
             never abandons any affair.
     This is called stretching enlightenment.
     Thus the good person is the teacher of those who are not good, and those who
             are not good are grist to the good person.
     Not to honor one’s teacher, not to cherish one’s grist – though one may be
             clever, this is to be lost adrift.
     This is called the pivotal mystery.


                                          28.

a>   One who knows the male but preserves the female becomes a ravine to the
          world. Such a one never swerves from constant virtue and returns
          again to be a new born baby.
     One who knows white but preserves black becomes a standard for the world.
          Such a one never deviates from constant virtue and returns again to
          being limitless.
     One who knows glory but preserves shame becomes a valley to the world.
          Such a one is always supplied with constant virtue and returns again
          to be an uncarved block.
                                                                                 19


b>   When the uncarved block is dispersed, vessels are made from it. The sage
          uses these to become the leader of the officers of state. Thus the
          greatest carving never cuts.


                                       29.

a>   The wish to grasp the world and control it – I see its futility. The world is a
           spiritlike vessel; it cannot be controlled. One who would control it
           would ruin it; one who would grasp it would lose it.

b>   Thus things may lead or follow, blow hot or cold, be strong or weak, sustain
           or destroy.
     Therefore the sage discards the excessive, the extravagant, the overbearing.


                                       30.

a>   He who assists a ruler by means of the Dao does not coerce the world by
     means of arms. Consequences come back around like a ring.
           Where troops encamp, brambles grow;
           After great armies, crops always fail.
     The good man is simply resolute; he never employs coercion. Be resolute
           without boast, resolute without threat, resolute without pride.
     Resolute from necessity, be resolute without coercion.

b>   When things in their prime grow old, they are called ‘contrary to the Dao’.
          What is contrary to the Dao comes to an early end.


                                       31.

     Weapons are ill fortuned tools. Things may detest them, hence the man of the
            Dao does not rely on them.
     When a junzi is at leisure he honors what is at his left; use of weapons honors
            the right. Thus weapons are not tools of a junzi.
     Weapons are ill fortuned tools; they must be used only from necessity. It is
            best to use them without gusto, to prevail without relish. To relish
            victory is to take joy in killing men. The man who takes joy in killing
            men will never attain his ambition in the world.
     Affairs of good fortune honor the left; affairs of ill fortune honor the right.
            The lieutenant’s place is to the left, the commander’s place is to the
            right. This means that mourning rites are the model. When the masses
            of another lord are killed, one should mourn them with wailing – for
            victory in battle, mourning rites are the model.
                                                                                 20



                                       32.

a>   The Dao is ever nameless. Though the uncarved block be small, it cannot be
           made the subordinate of any in the world. If a king or lord could
           preserve it, the things of the world would come to him of themselves.
           As heaven and earth conjoin to send down sweet dew, the people will
           settle themselves, though none so decrees.
     As soon as it is cut, then there are names. Once there are names one must
           know it’s time to stop. Knowing to stop is the way to avoid danger.

b>   The Dao is to the world as the Yangzi and sea are to streams and brooks.


                                       33.

     He who knows men is wise; he who knows himself is enlightened.
     He who conquers men has strength; he who conquers himself is strong.
     He who knows when he has enough is wealthy; he who perseveres has strong
          will.
     He who does not lose his place is lasting; he who lasts beyond his death is
          long lived.


                                       34.

a>   The Great Dao flows everywhere, at our every right and left. Relying upon it,
           the things of the world are born, yet it remains wordless; its work
           done it takes no name as the doer.

b>   Clothing and nourishing the things of the world, it never acts as their lord –
            constant without desire, it may be termed small. The things of the
            world return to it but it never acts as their lord – it may be termed
            great.
     Because it never takes itself to be great it is able to complete its greatness.


                                       35.

a>   Grasp the great image and the world will come; coming and encountering no
           harm, it will settle in great peace.

b>   Where there is music and food, travelers stop.
                                                                                       21


c>   When the Dao is spoken as words, how thin it is, without taste. Look at it and
           it cannot be seen; listen to it and it cannot be heard. But use it, and it
           cannot be exhausted.


                                         36.

a>   To shrink it you must stretch it; to weaken it you must strengthen it; to
           discard it you must raise it up; to seize it you must bestow it – this is
           called subtle discernment.

b>   The weak and supple overcomes the strong and hard.

c>   Fish must not emerge from the deeps; the vital tools of a state must not be
           revealed.


                                         37.

     The Dao is ever non-acting (wuwei), yet nothing is undone. If a lord or king
           can preserve this the things of the world will of themselves be
           transformed.
     Transformed, should desire arise, I will press it down with the uncarved
           block of namelessness. The uncarved block of namelessness--surely
           then they shall be without desire. Without desire and thus still, so will
           the world be settled of itself.


                                         38.

     The highest virtue (de) is without virtue, hence it has virtue. The lowest
             virtue never deviates from virtue, hence it lacks virtue. The highest
             virtue does not act (wuwei) and has no reason to act; the lowest virtue
             acts and has reason to act. The highest ren acts without any reason to
             act. The highest right (yi) acts and has reason to act. The highest li
             acts, and if no persons respond, rolls up its sleeves and twists their
             arms.
     Hence, only after the Dao is lost is there virtue; only after virtue is lost is
             there ren; only after ren is lost is there right; only after right is lost is
             there li.
     Li is the thinning of loyalty and faithfulness, when chaos first raises its head.
             Foreknowledge is the blossom of the Dao, when ignorance first begins.
     Therefore, the great man dwells in the thick, not in the thin; abides in the
             fruit, not in the blossom. Thus he discards the one and grasps the
             other.
                                                                                  22



                                       39.

a>   Those of old that gained the One:
             The sky (tian) gained the One and was thus clear;
             Earth gained the One and was thus calm;
             The spirits gained the One and were thus potent;
             The valley gained the One and was this full;
             The things of the world gained the One and were thus born;
             Kings and lords gained the One and were models to the world –
     This is what the One brought about.
             Without what makes it clear, the sky would likely split;
             Without what makes it calm, the earth would likely collapse;
             Without what makes them potent, the spirits would likely dissipate;
             Without what makes it full, the valley would likely run dry;
             Without what gives them birth, the world of things would likely be
                    extinguished;
             Without what makes them honored, kings and lords will likely topple.

b>   Therefore, the honored takes the lowly as root; high takes low as foundation.
            For this reason, kings and lords refer to themselves as ‘the orphan’,
            ‘the widow’, ‘the unemployed’ – does this take the lowly as the root or
            does it not?
     Hence the utmost renown is to be unknown. Have no wish be glossy like jades,
            rather be hard like stones.


                                       40.

a>   Reversal is the motion of the Dao. Weakness is the method of the Dao.

b>   The things of the world are born from being, and being is born of nothing.


                                       41.

a>   When the best gentlemen hear the Dao they practice it assiduously. When
          middling gentlemen hear the Dao, sometimes they seem to have it,
          sometimes they seem to have lost it. When the least of gentlemen hear
          the Dao they laugh out loud. If they did not laugh out loud, it would
          not be the Dao.

b>   Thus the ‘Standard Sayings’ says:
           The bright dao seems dark,
           The advancing dao seems to retreat,
           The level dao seems steep.
                                                                                   23


            Highest virtue (de) seems a valley,
            Greatest white seems sullied,
            Broad virtue seems inadequate,
            Vigorous virtue seems to shirk,
            Plain virtue seems soiled.
            The great square is cornerless
            The great vessel is last complete,
            The great note is rarified sound,
            The great image has no form.

c>   The Dao hides in wordlessness. Only the Dao is well begun and well
          completed.


                                       42.

a>   The Dao gives birth to one; one gives birth to two; two gives birth to three;
           three gives birth to the ten thousand things.

b>   The things of the world bear Yin on their backs and embrace the Yang. They
            exhaust their qi in harmony.

c>   People detest being orphaned or widowed or unemployed, yet these are the
           terms kings and lords use to refer to themselves.

d>   One may detract from a thing and it is enhanced thereby, or enhance it and
          so detract from it.


                                       43.

a>   The most pliant thing in the world will ride roughshod over the hardest.
          What comes out from where nothing is enters into what has no
          apertures.

b>   Hence I know the advantage of non-action (wuwei). The wordless teaching
           and the advantage of non-action – few in the world attain to these.


                                       44.

           One’s reputation or one’s body: which is dearer?
           One’s body or one’s goods: which is worth more?
           Gaining or losing: which is worse?
     Therefore, miserliness leads to great expense, hoarding leads to deep loss.
                                                                               24


     Know what is enough and escape shame; know when to stop and escape
          danger – thus can one long endure.


                                      45.

a>   Great perfection appears defective, so use can never make it worn; great
     fullness seems vacant, so use can never make it empty. Great straightness
     seems bent; great skill seems clumsy; great eloquence seems inarticulate.

b>   Haste overcomes cold, tranquility overcomes heat.

c>   Clear and tranquil, be a standard to the world.


                                      46.

a>   When the Dao prevails in the world, fast horses are corralled for manure;
          when the Dao does not prevail in the world, steeds of war are born in
          the city pastures.

b>   There is no calamity greater than not knowing what is sufficient; there is no
            fault greater than wishing to acquire. Thus the sufficiency of knowing
            what is sufficient is eternal sufficiency.


                                      47.

     Without going out your door, know the world; without looking out the
           window, know the Dao of Tian.
     The further you travel, the less you know.
     Hence the sage knows without going to it, names it without seeing, does
           nothing and it is achieved.


                                      48.

a>   He who studies is daily enlarged; he who follows the Dao is daily diminished.
          Diminished and then diminished yet more, at last attaining non-action
          (wuwei). Never acting, nothing is undone.

b>   To control the world, undertake nothing. Once you undertake to do anything
           you are unfit to control the world.
                                                                                    25


                                        49.

     The sage has no constant mind: he takes the mind of the people as his mind.
     When I treat the good as good and I also treat those who are not good as
           good, my virtue is good.
     When I treat the faithful as faithful and I also treat the unfaithful as faithful,
           my virtue is faithful.
     The sage appears shut to the world, and towards the world he blanks his
           mind in a daze. The people all entrust their eyes and ears to him; he
           treats them as children.


                                        50.

     Coming we are born, going we die.
     Three in ten are followers of life; three in ten are followers of death – at birth
            begun to move towards the death, these too are three in ten. Why is
            this? Because they treat life as life.
     I have heard that one good at protecting his life walks in the hills but never
            encounters rhinoceros or tiger, charges against armies and is never
            touched by weapon or armor. The rhinoceros finds no place to thrust
            its horn; the tiger finds no place to grip its claws; weapons find no
            place to drive their blades. Why is this? Because he has no death place
            in him.


                                        51.

a>   The Dao gives birth to them, virtue (de) rears them, things give them form,
           circumstances complete them.
     Thus all things in the world revere Dao and honor virtue. That the Dao is
           revered and virtue honored is ordained by no one; it is ever so of itself.
     Thus the Dao gives birth to them and virtue rears them – fosters them,
           nurtures them, settles them, completes them, nourishes them, covers
           them.

b>   To live but not possess, to act but depend on nothing, to lead without
            directing, this is called mysterious virtue.


                                        52.

a>   The world has a beginning – take it to be the mother of the world. Having
          grasped the mother, you can know the child. Having grasped the child,
          return to preserve the mother and you will live out your life without
          danger.
                                                                                     26



b>   Block the portals and shut the gate, you will live out your days and never be
            troubled. Open the portals and turn to the tasks, you will live out your
            days and never be rescued.

c>   To see the small is called enlightenment; to preserve the pliant is called
             strength.
     Use the gleam to return to enlightenment without bringing calamity upon
             oneself.
     This is to make the constant your habit.


                                         53.

a>   Had I the least wisdom I would walk the great Dao. I would fear only side
           paths. The great Dao is so level, yet people prefer shortcuts.

b>   The court is so tainted, the fields so overgrown, the granaries so empty.
           Robes gleaming with patterns, belts hung with swords, sated with
           food and drink, goods in excess – such is to rob the destitute. Robbing
           the destitute is not the Dao.


                                         54.

a>   What is firmly planted cannot be uprooted; what is tightly embraced cannot
           be stripped away. Descendants will thereby sacrifice without cease.

b>   Cultivate it in yourself and your virtue (de) will be authentic; cultivate it in
            the family and it will have virtue in abundance; cultivate it in the
            village and its virtue will endure; cultivate it in the state and its virtue
            will be rich; cultivate it through the world and it virtue will spread
            everywhere.

c>   Hence see people through oneself; see families through your family; see
           villages through your village; see states through your state; see the
           world through the world.
     How do I know the world is thus? By means of this.


                                         55.

a>   One who possesses virtue in abundance may be compared to a new born
          babe. Wasps and scorpions, poisonous snakes: none will bite him.
          Fierce beasts will not maul him, predatory birds will not swoop down
          upon him.
                                                                                 27


     His bones are weak, his muscles pliable, and his grasp is firm. He knows
           nothing of the female and the male, yet his male organ stirs. His
           essence is at its most pure. He can scream all day and not become
           hoarse. This is harmony at its height.

b>   Knowing harmony is called constant; knowing the constant is called
            enlightened.
     To increase one’s nature is called inauspicious; when the mind directs the qi
            it is called self-coercion.

c>   When things in their prime grow old, they are called ‘contrary to the Dao’.
          What is contrary to the Dao comes to an early end.


                                        56.

a>   Those who know do not speak; those who speak do not know.

b>           Blunt the point,
             Undo the tangle,
             Soften the glare,
             Join the dust.
     This is called the dark joining.

c>   Hence one cannot become close to it, one cannot become distant from it, one
            cannot profit it, one cannot harm it, one cannot honor it, one cannot
            disdain it.
     Thus it is honored by the world.


                                        57.

a>   To order a state use uprightness; to lead troops use stratagems; to control the
           world undertake nothing.
     How do I know it is so? By means of this.

b>   As the world is filled with more taboos the people grow poorer; as the people
            possess more sharp weapons the state grows benighted; as men use
            more crafty skills strange goods increasingly appear; as laws are
            proclaimed with increasing clarity bandits become more common.

c>   Hence the sage says: If I take no action the people will transform of
           themselves; if I love tranquility the people will be upright of
           themselves; if I undertake nothing the people will create wealth of
           themselves; if I have no desires the people will of themselves become
           uncarved blocks.
                                                                                  28



                                        58.

a>   When the government is narrow and dull the people are simple and pure;
          when the government is clear and acute the people are sharp and
          crafty.

b>   Disaster – good fortune adheres therein; good fortune – disaster lurks
             therein.
     Who knows its limit? It possesses no settled norm. The norm turns into the
             anomaly, the good turns into the monstrous.
     It has been long indeed that men have lost their way.

c>   Hence the sage is like a square that does not cut, a corner that is not sharp, a
           straight line that cannot align, a light that does not shine.


                                        59.

a>   In governing people and serving Tian, there is nothing like parsimony.
           Parsimony may be called ‘submitting in advance’. Submitting in
           advance may be called piling up virtue (de). If you pile up virtue there
           is nothing you cannot overcome, and if there is nothing you cannot
           overcome, the limit of it cannot be known. When the limit cannot be
           known, you may possess the state. If you possess the mother of the
           state, you may long endure.

b>   This is called the deep root and the solid trunk; it is the dao of long gazing
            upon enduring life.

                                        60.

a>   Governing a large state is like cooking a small fish.

b>   When one approaches governing the world by means of the Dao, ghosts will
          have no potency. It is not that they have no potency, but that their
          potency will not harm people, It is not that their potency will not
          harm people, but that the sage too will not harm people. These two
          will do no mutual harm, and therein will virtue (de) commingle and
          return.

                                        61.

     A large state lies downstream; it is the female of the world. In intercourse,
           the female overcomes the male by means of stillness, because stillness
           lies below. Thus when the large state takes the lower position it
                                                                                    29


             controls the small state. When a small state takes the lower position, it
             places itself under the control of the large state. In the one case the
             state takes the lower position to control, in the other it takes the lower
             position to place itself under control.
     Large states wish no more than to annex and nurture people; small states
             wish no more than to enter into service. Both gain what they wish.
     It is appropriate that the large dwell below.


                                        62.

a>   The Dao is the altar of the things of the world. It is the treasure of the good
           person and the protection of the bad person.
     Fine words can be marketed; honorable conduct can add to one’s rank. As
           for the bad person, how can they be abandoned?

a>   Hence when the Son of Tian assumes the throne, in appointing the three high
           ministers, he who bears the jade disk of court and presents a team of
           horses is not esteemed so much as he who sits in place and offers this
           dao.

a>   Why was this dao so esteemed in the past? Is it not said that by means of it
          one will get what one seeks, and transgressors will evade punishment?
          Hence it was esteemed by the world.


                                        63.

a>   Engage in non-action, undertake having no undertakings, taste the tasteless.
           Enlarge the small, increase the few, requite hostility with virtue (de).

b>   Plan for the difficult on the basis of the simple, do great things on the basis of
            details – the difficult undertakings of the world are all arise from
            simple situations, and the greatest undertakings in the world all arise
            from small details.

c>   Hence the sage never does a great act, and is thus able to complete his
           greatness.

d>   Thoughtless assent always brings little trust; many easy acts always lead to
          many difficulties. Therefore the sage seems to treat them as difficult,
          and thus never has difficulties.
                                                                                 30


                                       64.

a>   When things are at rest they are easy to maintain; when situations have not
           yet emerged they are easy to plan for. When brittle, things are easy to
           split; when minute things are easy to disperse.
     Deal with things before they occur; order things before they are disordered.

b>   A tree trunk several arm spans round was born of the tiniest seed. Towers
            nine stories high rise from foundations of piled earth. A journey of a
            thousand li begins with the first footfall.

c>   He who acts, fails; he who grasps, loses.
     Therefore the sage takes no action (wuwei) and hence has no failure, does no
           grasping and hence takes no loss.

d>   When people pursue an undertaking, it is always at the point of success that
          they ruin it. Attend at the end as you did at the start and you will have
          no failures.

e>   Therefore, the sage desires not to desire and does not value goods hard to
            come by; he learns not to learn and redeems the errors of the masses.
     Assisting the things of the world to be as they are in themselves, he dares not
            act.

                                       65.

a>   Men of the past who were good at following the Dao did not use it to
          enlighten the people, they used it to make them ignorant. People are
          difficult to govern is when they have much knowledge.

b>   Hence one who governs by means of knowledge plunders the state; one who
           does not govern by means of knowledge brings fortune to the state.
           Indeed, these two constitute the standard – to be always aware of the
           standard is called dark virtue (de).

c>   Dark virtue is profound, far reaching; it revolves together with things. Only
           then does it attain great compliance.


                                       66.

     The reason that the Yangzi and the sea rule as kings over hundreds of river
                  valleys is because they know well to take the lower position;
                  that is why they rule as kings over hundreds of river valleys.
     Hence if you wish to rule above the people you must employ words to take
                  the lower position; if you wish to lead people you must place
                                                                                  31


                   yourself behind them.
     Therefore, the sage dwells above and the people don’t consider him heavy, he
                   stands ahead of them and they do not consider it an injury to
                   them. Hence the world delights in supporting him untiringly.
     Because he does not contend, no one in the world can contend with him.


                                       67.

a>   All in the world say my dao is huge, but appears to be worthless. It is indeed
             because it is huge that it appears worthless. If it were worthy would it
             not long since have become small?

b>   I possess three treasures; I protect them in my grasp. One is compassion, the
            second is frugality, and third, I dare not take the lead in the world.
            Compassionate, thus I can have valor; frugal, thus I can extend my
            territory; unwilling to take the lead in the world, thus my works
            endure.

c>   Now were I to discard compassion in favor of valor, frugality in favor of
          territory, taking my place behind in favor of leading, I would die.

d>   He who goes to battle with compassion prevails; who defends his state with
          compassion will be impregnable. He whom Tian wishes to save it
          protects by means of compassion.


                                       68.

     A good warrior does not act fearsome; one good at battle does not become
            angry; one good at defeating the enemy does not contest; one good at
            directing people takes the lower position.
     This is the virtue of not contending; this is called directing the strength of
            others; this is called companion to Tian – the utmost limit of the past.


                                       69.

a>   Military strategists have a saying: I dare not act as the host, but rather the
            guest; I dare not advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot.
     This is called walking where there is no road, rolling up the sleeve where
            there is no arm, grasping where there is no weapon, struggling where
            there is no enemy.

b>   There is no calamity greater than having no enemy, without an enemy, I have
            almost lost my treasure. Thus when two matched armies contest, it is
                                                                                32


            the victor that mourns.


                                       70.

a>   My words are so easy to understand and so easy to put in practice; none in
          the world can understand or practice them.

b>   Words have a governing meaning, affairs have a ruling actor.

c>   It is because they are have no knowledge that they do not understand me.
             Those who understand me are few; those who emulate me are
             esteemed.

d>   Therefore, the sage wears coarse clothes and conceals in them a precious jade.


                                       71.

     To know you do not know is best; not to know that one does not know is to be
           flawed.
     One who sees his flaws as flaws is therefore not flawed.
     The sage is flawless. He sees his flaws as flaws, therefore he is flawless.


                                       72.

a>   When the people do not hold the awesome in awe, awful events occur.

b>   Do not narrow their living space nor crush their means of livelihood. Because
           you do not crush them, they will not view you as a crushing burden.

c>   Therefore the sage knows himself but does not display himself, cherishes
           himself but does not honor himself.
     Thus he discards the one and takes the other.


                                       73.

a>   One who is valiant in being daring will be killed. One who is valiant in being
          timid will live. Of these two, one is profitable and one is harmful.

b>   Who knows why Tian hates what it hates? Even the sage takes this to be
          difficult.

c>   The dao of Tian excels at prevailing though it does not contend; it excels at
                                                                                 33


            responding, though it does not speak; things come of themselves
            though it does not summon; it excels at planning though it is flexible.

d>   The net of Tian is vast; though the mesh is broadly spaced, nothing gets
           through.


                                       74.

a>   If the people do not fear death, what good is threatening them with death? If
             you make the people ever fearful of death and threaten to execute any
             who innovate new things, who will dare to do so?

b>   Always have an executioner whose charge it is to kill. One who takes the
           place of an executioner is like one who takes the carpenter’s place in
           hewing wood. Few who take the carpenter’s place fail to wound their
           hands.


                                       75.

     When the people starve it is because their ruler extracts too much in taxes,
             that is why they starve. When the people are hard to govern it is
             because their ruler takes action, that is why they are hard to govern.
             When the people regard death as unimportant it is because they seek
             life too assiduously, that is why they regard death as unimportant.
     It is precisely doing nothing for the sake of life that makes one worthier than
             those who value life.


                                       76.

a>   When born, people are pliant and weak; when they die they are stiff and
     strong. The things of the world, such as trees and grasses, are born pliant
     and fragile; they die shriveled and dry.

b>   Thus the hard and strong are followers of death; the pliant and weak are
     followers of life.

c>   Therefore, when a weapon is strong it cannot conquer; when a tree is strong
     it is put to the axe. The strong and great dwell below; the pliant and weak
     dwell above.
                                                                                  34


                                       77.

a>   The dao of Tian is like the stretching of a bow: the high is brought down and
           the low is raised up; it takes from what has abundance and supplies
           what is wanting. The dao of Tian takes from what has abundance and
           supplies what is wanting, but the dao of man is not thus. It takes from
           what is wanting in order to supply what has abundance.

b>   Who can serve Heaven by means of abundance? Only one who possesses the
          Dao.

c>   Hence the sage acts but relies on nothing. His task accomplished, he does not
           take the credit: he does not wish to manifest his worth.


                                       78.

a>   Nothing in the world is more weak and soft than water, yet nothing surpasses
            it in conquering the hard and strong – there is nothing that can
            compare.
     All know that the weak conquers the strong and the soft conquers the hard.
            But none are able to act on this.

b>   Thus the sage says that he who receives the derision of the state is the lord of
           the state altars; he who receives the misfortune of the state is the king
           of the world.

c>   Straight words seem to reverse themselves.


                                       79.

a>   When making peace between disputants, there is always some remaining
          sense of dispute – how can this constitute a good act?

b>   Therefore, the sage keeps hold of the creditor’s tally but never calls in the
           debts others owe him.
c>   One with virtue (de) oversees the tally, one without virtue oversees the
           payment.

d>   The dao of Tian has no favorites; it always shifts to the good person.
                                                                               35



                                      80.

     Make the state small and the people few. Let there be arms for troops in tens
            and hundreds, but unused. Make the people treat death seriously and
            not move to distant places.
     Though there be boats and carriages, they shall not be ridden. Though there
            be armor and weaponry, they shall not be deployed.
     Let the people return to keeping records by knotted rope.
     Their food sweet to them, their clothes beautiful to them, their homes
            comfortable to them, their customs joyful to them.
     Though neighboring states be in sight of one another and the sounds of the
            cocks and dogs heard from one to the other, the people of one will
            never visit the other, even as they grow old and die.


                                      81.

a>   Trustworthy words are not beautiful; beautiful words are not trustworthy.
           Good words are not eloquent; eloquent words are not good.

b>   The wise are not broadly learned; the broadly learned are not wise.

c>   The sage does not hoard. Having used what he has for others, his possessions
           increase; having given what he has to others, he has more and more.

d>   The dao of Tian benefits and does not harm. The dao of the sage is for others
           and does not contend.
